High-Order, Conservative Discontinuous Galerkin Algorithms for (Gyro)
Kinetic Simulations of Edge Plasma

A. H. Hakim and G. W. Hammett

We explore algorithms developed recently for the solution of a class
of problems expressible as Hamiltonian equation coupled to elliptic
field equation. Examples include 2D incompressible flow,
Vlasov-Poisson and the gyrokinetic equations. Such systems admit two
quadratic invariants, energy and a second quantity, known by various
names (e.g., enstrophy or entropy) in different contexts. The
algorithm uses a continuous finite-element scheme for the elliptic
equation and a DG scheme for the Hamiltonian dynamics. With a proper
choice of basis functions and numerical flux function both energy and
enstrophy are conserved. Even with a choice of a diffusive, but more
stable, upwind flux the scheme is shown to conserve energy, in
addition to being enstrophy stable. For the Vlasov equation coupled to
a quasi-neutrality condition or a Poisson equation, the total energy
is conserved. The high-order accuracy of the finite-element
representation, with a hyper-collision operator to handle recurrence,
results in an accurate and efficient scheme. We show results from
passive advection, nonlinear vortex merger (incompressible 2D
hydrodynamics) and several 1D Vlasov-Poisson problems, including
electron plasma oscillations and ion acoustic waves with
quasineutrality used to determine fields.
